COMP 228
Practice Problems 4

The following are pratice problem. You are not required to
hand in solutions. You are encouraged to solve the questions
on your own.



QUESTION 1:

Consider a RAM system of size 64 Kbytes. For each of the 
following cases show how this RAM can be built. Draw a 
MEMORY MAP showing which chips are used for which range of 
addresses.  Draw a NEAT drawing (employ the use of drawing 
aids such as rulers, templates, etc.) showing how the chips
are connected to the address decoder and the CPU address, data, and 
control lines:

(a) Use memory chips each having 8K x 8 bits.
(b) Use memory chips each having 16K x 4 bits.


Use a 1-d organization, then repeat using a 2-d organization.


SOLUTION :

(see provided schematic diagrams)


QUESTION 2:

A block-set-associative cache consists of a total of 64
blocks divided into four block sets. The main memory contains
4096 blocks, each block has 128 bytes.

(a) How many bits are there in a main memory address?
(b) How many bits are there in each of the TAG, SET, and
    WORD fields?


SOLUTION

(a) We must first determine the total number of locations (in this case, each
    location is 8 bits wide) contained in the main memory as:
   
     # of locations =  # of main memory blocks x # of bytes/block
                    =  4096 blocks x 128 bytes/blocks
                    =  524 288 bytes

     Therefore, the number of address lines needed is = log ( 524 288)
                                                           2     

                                                      = 19

    Therefore, a main memory address consists of 19 bits.

(b)  We divide up the bits of the main memory address into:

     ------------------------
     | TAG  |  SET  | WORD  |   
     ------------------------



as follows:


WORD = 7 since each block contains 128 bytes, hence we need 7 bits
       to uniquely identify one of these 128 bytes

SET =   we must determine the number of sets contained in the cache.
        Since the cache consists of 64 blocks, and each set contains
        4 blocks, we have a total of 64/4 = 16 different sets in the
        cache. Thus, we need 4 bits in the SET field of a main memory
        address to identify one of these 16 sets.

TAG = whatever is left over is used for the tag
       (19 bits) - ( 7 + 4)
    =  19 - 11
    = 8 bits for the TAG field.



QUESTION 3:

(a) Explain the difference between memory-mapped IO and the IO-Port approach.


(b) What are the three types of Direct Memory Acess techniques? Of these three
    which is the fastest?


SOLUTION

(a) In memory-mapped IO, to access an IO device we use the same MOV source , device_address
    instruction as an ordinary MOV source , some_memory_address.  In the IO port approach,
    the instruction set contains different instructions used for reading and writing to
    an IO device (for example IN port_address, and OUT port_address).  This means that
   an IO device can have the same address  as a main memory location. The CPU distinguishes
    between the two addresses by use of an IO/M line (which is used by the address decoding 
   logic (in addition to the address lines) to select either the IO device or the memory device.

(b) Block Transfer, cycle-stealing, and interleaved DMA.
    block transfer is the fastest.




